---
title: "Understanding Group Membership from Language Use"
collection: talks
type: "Tutorial"
permalink: /talks/2021-07-27-tutorial-1
venue: "ETH Zurich (online)"
date: 2021-07-27
location: "Zurich, switzerland"
---

[More information here](https://github.com/Identity-lab/Understanding_Group_Membership_from_Language-Use_IC2S2_Tutorial)

Groups are at the heart of much of our social lives, and are therefore fundamental to the social sciences and humanities. Different groups affect individuals at different times through their norms and values. Computational techniques, and linguistic analysis in particular, have provided researchers with the means to understand which group affects an individual at a particular point in time, and what a group stands for. This tutorial will introduce a toolkit for building a classifier based on linguistic indicators that can distinguish which group membership affects an individual at the point of writing. It will provide the audience, first, with the required theoretical background of social identity theory, and what the potential applications of this toolkit are. Second, it provides hands-on examples on how to adapt this method for different groups of interest. Third, it will introduce best practices for ensuring the quality of the tool, such as combining social media data and experimental data for psychometric validation. The tutorial will also introduce techniques on how to apply the tool to different domains (domain adaptation) and, finally, a discussion around how to map similarities and differences between groups using multi-dimensional scaling. Basic experience with Python and a good working knowledge of basic statistical techniques (e.g., logistic regression) will be an advantage when participating, particularly for the hands-on part of the tutorial.
